# Lesson 5 - Arrays & Dictionaries

We've covered the basics of objects, and now we're getting a bit more abstract with two abstract (but very useful) data structures: arrays and dictionaries.

## Arrays

Like a set in mathematics, arrays are an ordered list of a particular data type (primitives, objects, other arrays, etc.). They allow you to store and access data in a convenient way, without needed to declare a separate identifier for each variable. Follow along on an IDE as we explore how to use them:

### Initialization

There are two ways to declare an array of integers:

```java
// First method
int intArray[];

// Second method
int[] intArray;
```

Of course, `int` can be replaced with any other data type. However, when initializing an array, you'll also need to specify the maximum number of elements that it has:

```java
int numElements = 25;
intArray = new int[numElements];
int newIntArray = new int[numElements + 200];
```

When an array is initialized, all elements are set to `0`, `false`, or `null` at first, depending on the data type of the array. Alternatively, an array can be explicitly initialized with values:

```java
int[] explicitArray = {25, 225, 2225};
```

### Accessing values

In Java (and most other languages), arrays are zero-indexed, which means that the first element of the array has an index of `0`, while the last element of the array has an index of `array.length - 1`. Individual elements are accessed by putting the index number in brackets next to the array's identifier. For example,

```java
System.out.println(explicitArray[0]);
System.out.println(explicitArray[explicitArray.length - 1]);
System.out.println(explicitArray[2]);
```

would output

```
25
2225
2225
```

Using a `for` loop, you can access values by iterating through the indices of the array. For any array, a general model to input values would be:

```java
Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);
int size = sc.nextInt();

int[] anArray = new int[size];

for(int i = 0; i < anArray.length; i++){
	anArray[i] = sc.nextInt();
}
```

The same applies for objects; an `Person` array (see previous lesson) can be created as follows:

```java
Person[] personArray = new Person[size];
for(int i = 0; i < personArray.length; i++){
	String name = sc.next();
	personArray[i] = new Person(name);
}

```

**Check understanding**

How would you print the contents of an integer array? In ascending order? In descending order?

??? "View solution"
    ```java
    // Ascending order
    for(int i = 0; i < intArray.length; i++){
    	System.out.println(intArray[i]);
    }

    //Descending order [solution 1]
    for(int i = intArray.length - 1; i >= 0; i--){
    	System.out.println(intArray[i])
    }

    //Descending order [solution 2]
    for(int i = 0; i < intArray.length; i++){
    	System.out.println(intArray[intArray.length - i - 1]);
    }
    ```

**Exercises**

* Given an integer array, compute the product of the first and last elements of the array
* Given an integer array, compute the average value of the in the array
* Given a string array, print the concatenation of the strings with even indices (hint: how would you modify the `for` loop to iterate through the desired values?)
* Find the maximum value in an integer array
* Modify an integer array such that all positive values are replaced with `1` and all negative values are replaced with `-1`

## `ArrayList`s

While arrays in Java have a fixed size when they are initialized, ArrayLists are objects that allow for dynamically-sized arrays. This is useful when you do not know how many objects are in an array, such as match entries in the scouting app.

### Initialization

The syntax for initializing or declaring a new ArrayList is very similar:

```java
//Just declaration
ArrayList<Integer> arrayList;

//Initializing an empty ArrayList
ArrayList<Integer> emptyList = new ArrayList<>();

//Initilizing an ArrayList with 25 elements
ArrayList<Integer> thirdList = new ArrayList<>(25);
```

## References

## Enhanced `for` loops

## 2D Arrays

## Enumerations

## `HashMap`s

## HW: A Bank Network