# Lesson 5 - Alliance Selection

Alliance selection is where the all hard work we put in during build season and the event comes into play, including developing the app, training scouts, creating travel lists, qualitative/quantitative scouting, taking videos, compiling data, and creating picklists.

## Procedure

If we're in the top eight seeds by the end of the qualification matches, we'll have the opportunity to become an **alliance captain**. This means that we can create an alliance of our own by inviting teams, or we join another alliance if a higher-seeded team invites us. In the first round of selection, the first seed makes their first selection, followed by the second seed, all the way down to the eighth seed. In the second round of selection, the Alliance 8 chooses their second team (the 9th overall pick) before the other alliances, ending with Alliance 1 making the 16th overall pick. At the *FIRST* Championship and some offseasons, a third round of selection occurs to form four-team alliances. The procedure is identical to the first round of selection. This method of selection is known as the **serpantine draft**. Some offseasons, such as the Indiana Robotics Invitational, may use a modified process in which Alliance 1 makes the first selection in each round.

In official competitions and most offseasons, a higher-seeded alliance captain may invite a lower-seeded captain (e.g. 1st seed invites the 6th seed). However, the *lower-seeded team does not have to accept the invitation*. If this occurs, the lower-seeded team remains an alliance captain, but they cannot be chosen by another team (e.g. 2nd seed cannot invite the 6th seed after they decline the 1st seed). If the lower-seeded does accept, they become the first pick of the higher-seeded alliance, and the seeds below the invited team are moved up by one; the next-highest ranked team becomes an alliance captain (e.g. 6th seed joins Alliance 1, so 7th seed becomes 6th seed, 8th seed becomes 7th seed, and the team with Rank 9 becomes the captain of Alliance 8).

Note that it's possible that many teams within the top eight may decline a high-seeded team. This results in a situation where most of the top eight seeds cannot pick each other, a strategy known as **scorched earth** that "levels" the playing field by preventing powerhouse teams from partnering. This sometimes occurs when a relatively-unknown team becomes a top seed at an event; see [Team 1678 in 2013](https://www.thebluealliance.com/event/2013cur) or [Team 303 in 2017](https://www.thebluealliance.com/event/2017cars) at the *FIRST* Championship.

Of course, alliance selection boils down to three possible actions during alliance selection: picking, accepting, and declining.

## Picking teams

As an alliance captain, making the first round pick is easy. Simply go down the picklist and invite the best team that is available, crossing off other teams as they join other alliances or decline invitations. Remember to keep lower-seeded alliance captains on the list, as they may still be invited (if they did not decline an invitation). If your invitation is declined, go on to the next best team on the picklist.

To invite a team, you would say:

> Team 25 would like to invite Team [team number] to join our alliance.

Note how team numbers are pronounced:

* One or two digit numbers are said the same way as in standard English. For example, 8 is "eight," 25 is "twenty-five," and 67 is "sixty-seven.""

* For three digit numbers, the first digit is said first, followed by the second and third digits as if they are a two digit number. If the second digit is zero (0), say "oh" instead of "zero". For example, 118 is "one eighteen," 254 is "two fifty-four," and 303 is "three oh three." Note that some team numbers have special pronunciations based on their team branding; 225 is "two two five," 747 is "seven four seven," etc.

* Four digit numbers are said as if the first two digits and the last two digits are distinct two digit numbers. For example, 1089 is "ten eighty-nine," 1403 is "fourteen oh three," 1619 is "sixteen nineteen," and 2590 is "twenty-five ninety." Some team numbers also have special pronunciations; e.g. 2468 (Team Appriciate) is "two four six eight."

Once you make your first round selection, confer with their representative to get a feel for what they are looking for in a second pick. Adapt your strategy based on other alliances as necessary, but you should generally stick to the order on your picklist; remember that you are the alliance captain and you make the final decision. If you are unsure about which team to choose, you may want to confirm with other scouts and/or mentors about the decision. Keep in mind the time that you have left to pick, while crossing off teams that are being selected. You may want to arrange scouts in the stands to hold up a whiteboard with your pick as well, though go with your gut if you're faced with a hard choice and little time to decide.

Once you decide, the standard script is as follows:

> You: Team 25

> Other representative: and Team [team number]

> You: would like to invite Team [team number] to join our alliance.

Note that having other representatives say their own team number is a practice that is commmon in the *FIRST* Mid-Atlantic district, but not at regional events or the *FIRST* Championship. Try to read the other representative to prevent awkward situations.

Of course, being an alliance captain is the perfect opportunity to make puns, a tradition on Team 25. Simply replace the word "invite" in the script with your desired verb (and noun) to fit the team you are inviting and the current game. You may also append phrases to the beginning or end of the script, as long as you clearly state both team numbers and indicate that you want to invite them. Examples include:

* Team 25 would like to *test our limits* with Team 303 [The T.E.S.T. Team].
* Team 25 would like to *work in parallel* with Team 1257 [Parallel Universe].
* We hope that this team won't *sa-BOT-tage* us, because—*oh my lordy*—Team 25 would like to invite Team 1640 [Sa-BOT-age].
* Team 25 and Team 1640 would like to *power up toward Mercury* with Team 1089 [Team Mercury].

## Accepting invitations

If you are currently an alliance captain, you must accept an invitation; otherwise, you will not be able to compete in the playoffs. However, if you are an alliance captain, you have the option to accept or decline. There's around 30 seconds to decide this, so keep in mind the order of your picklist. A general rule is that if you're the $N^\text{th}$ seed, you should accept if the team that is inviting you is ranked $2N-1$ or better on your picklist (e.g. if you're the third seed, accept if the team inviting you is 1st to 5th on your picklist). That way, you'll still be on a fairly strong alliance, as there is also the risk that the team inviting you will scorch earth if you are second seed, for example. It's also possible to have a strategic advantage due to the serpantine draft by picking at a lower seed, depending the game (see [Montgomery 2017](https://www.thebluealliance.com/event/2017njski)).

To accept, say

> Team 25 gratefully accepts.

Note that saying "graciously" instead of "gratefully" is poor practice, as you cannot deem yourself to be gracious!

There is a lot of room for puns when accepting, as long as you are clear that you are accepting, and you say our team number. Examples include:

* Team 25 would like to work *in parallel* [Parallel Universe]
* Team 25 would love to *raid a victory* together again [RoboRaiders]
* Team 25 would love to help *fire up* this alliance [TechFire]
* Team 25 would like to *stand by* our decision from last season: we gratefully accept [The T.E.S.T. Team]
* Team 25 wouldn't like you to be our *nemesis* during the playoffs, so we gratefully accept [Nemesis]

## Declining invitations

To decline a team, say:

> Team 25 respectfully declines.

Please do *not* modify the script or use a pun, as your attempts may be viewed as un-graciously professional. Afterward, return back to your designated spot as Alliance Captain. Keep in mind that you cannot be invited by another team; if this occurs, remain in your spot, and the emcee will inform the other team that they cannot invite you.